## Overview and Week 1 ##

### Overview ###

**Source Code Repository**:
https://github.com/aporter/coursera-android

### Introduction to the Android Platform ###

The Android Platform is a Software stack. It has different layers from the low ones that manage the operating system itself to phone apps like phone dialer, web browser.

The Android SDK is used to create Android Applications


**The Android Architecture**

* *Linux Kernel*. This is at the bottom and there are system libraries and the *Android Runtime System*. Then the *Application Framework* layer supports the development of new Android apps and at the very top Android provides some applications like the contacts database, the web browser


**The Linux Kernel**

Core Services that devices will rely on.

* Security: only those with proper authorization can access

* Memory & Process Management: multiple processes can run simultaneously

* File & Network I/O

* Device Drivers

Additionally there are some Android Specific features:

* Power Management

* Android Shared Memory

* Low memory killer

* Interprocess communication


**Libraries**

Often written in C and C++, they are the "native" libraries. Things like quick rendering web pages or updating the display. Android has its own C libraries for thread and process creation, mathematical computation, memory alloc.

There's a **Display Manager**, **Media Frameworks**, **OpenGL**, **SQLite**

The same layer includes the **Android Runtime**.

* There are core Java libraries. They include basic java classes, app lifecycle, internet/web services, unit testing (java.\*, javax.\*, android.\*, org.\*, junit.\*)

* The **Dalvik virtual machines** actually execute Android apps.

After writing the programs in Java code, it's compiled to Java bytecode files

Then a **DX** tool converts Java bytecode files to a single dex bytecode file (classes.dex). Then this is packed with other app resources. Finally Dalvik executes dex bytecodes.

**Dalvik** was designed for resource-constrained environments. Cell phones are less powered.

Take a look at: http://wwww.youtube.com/watch?v=ptjedOZEXPM

http://developer.android.com/reference/packages.html


**The application framework**

This contains reusable software that many mobile apps are likely to need. The view system for example has the buttons and interace parts.

* Package Manager. This keeps track of all the apps currently installed on the device.

* Window Manager. Manages the many windows that comprise applications.

There's a **window notification bar** and a **main app window**. Subwindows can be used like menues and dialoges.

* View System. Icons, text entry boxes, buttons and more. The phone application for example is organized as a set of tabs.

* Resource Manager. Manages the non-compiled resources that make up an app like strings, graphics and layout files.

* Activity Manager. There are different activities per application. Many activities start on the apps by doing some action.

* Content provider. Databases that allow sharing and storing information. They are worked to work among applications.

* Location Manager. Allows apps to receive location and movement information. It´s possible doing things like finding directions from my current location.

* Notification Manager. Allows apps to place info into the notification bar. Sw is always waiting for messages and things.


**Application layer**

Home screen, contacts, email reader, browser. No app is hardcoded into the system, they can be replaced by any other app.


## The Android Development Environment. Pt I ##

This is an integrated set of tools that allows creating our own set of apps.

Install the ADT bundle:
http://developer.android.com/sdk

The ADT bundle provides the latest Android Platform including documentation, there are also android specific plugins.

https://dl-ssl.google.com/android/eclipse/

File - New - Android Application Project

    HelloAndroid
    course.examples.helloandroid

Open **activity_main.xml** has the app user interface layout. **MainActivity.java** has the source code.

Run as... - Android Application.


**The Android Emulator**

Go to *Android Virtual Device Manager*

New.

AVD Name: GalaxyNexus
Target: Android 4.2.2

**Use the Emulator**

Modifications are isolated to the device.

THe emulator is really slow. Some features are not well supported like bluetooth and we can't connect devices to it. Some apps won't run there.

Speed and latency of different device networks. Battery power can be modified, location coordinates.

**Connect via telnet**

    telnet localhost 5554
    network speed edge
    network speed full
    power capacity 5
    power status not-charging

    geo fix 0.00 40.00

We can also simulate network interactions.

    sms send 3015555555 "This is a message"

Two emulators can interact with each other. We can call the port number that we see at the top of the window


## The Android Development Environment. Pt II ##

**Debugger**

Allows checking the internal state of an app. **onCreate()** is the starting point when the app is executed.

Set breakpoints (toogle breakpoint) on the onCreate method.

* Move with **Step over**

Other times other tools might be useful.


**Dalvik Debug Monitor Service**

1. Open the DDMS perspective, you can see a list of connected devices and processes running on them

2. See **File Explorer**. It shows the files on the file system. On *data* apps temporarily store data, there could be a memory card as a subdirectory on *mnt*.

3. On the bottom there's the *Logcat* view with information of things that are happenning on the device.

Developers can log their own information.

3 *Trace View* traces the methods that the app calls. Make sure DDMS is there and click on *Start profiling* button. Run the app, then stop thehh profiling and Traceview will show the information graphically.

There's a timeline view with Sequence and duration and there's the profile view with statistics and more info about called methods.

We should set some permissions if we want to be traced by this tool.

7. **Hierarchy View**. It's another perspective, when it starts we go to the Window panel and choose our app. It's a graphical representation of our User Interface. There's the app window with 2 children: a title bar and a large rectangular body of the application. We can inspect particular information of the elements that are displayed. 
